>> Spencer Schneidenbach: I do
wanna mention control flow, and
you've seen a little bit of this,
we need to be able to alter how our
program executes based on
the current state that it's in.
So, we've already kind of
looked at if statements,
whereas if we have this (age >= 18),
I'll paste that in here, boom.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Move that over.
One thing writer does for me is it
automatically adjusts my white space.
So, if we have our age, and we say
that we're greater than equal to 18,
it's gonna print you are an adult.
There's a couple of
different iterations or
kind of things of this that
are important to call out.
So, like in most other languages,
you're gonna be able to do an if else.
Same thing here with C#,
if this condition doesn't get met,
it will execute what goes
on in the else blocks.
So we check there, and we say that
if the age is 16 you are a minor.
You can also have multiple cascading if
statements where you can also check other
conditions.
You can say, if age is greater than 18,
Console.WriteLine("You are an adult."); {
else if (age >= 13) ("You are a
teenager.");, and so on and so forth.
One thing that's syntactically important
is that some languages do not require that
you have these parenthesis here.
C#, they are required, so
I wanted to make sure to call that out.
Switch statements are another one if
you have a long list of values and
you're really only checking one
of those particular values, and
you're checking it multiple different
ways to see if it equals certain things.
A switch statement is
a great way to do that.
So let's just copy this code into here,
and
you can see that based on our day of
the week, boom, boom, there we go.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Format
that nicely, there we go,
based on the day of the week it's
going to print a different string.
Some things to note about the switch
statement, the switch always begins
with switch at the top and
then the variable that you're checking.
And then you will go down inside
of this curly brace that indicates
a block of code, and it indicates
the block inside of the switch statement.
And you'll see, for case 1,
it will write Monday,
first day of the week is Monday
in certain cultures, right?
Case 2 is Tuesday, and so on, and
you see that because of our day is 3,
it gets evaluated to Wednesday.
One of those vestigial parts of C# is
you'll notice this break statement.
We don't have the break statement there,
the C# compiler can complain at you and
say, no, you have to break this switch
statement before you're able to exit it.
So it's something that is required.
There's also a default case,
you can also have a default case.
So if you're checking this for a value
that doesn't fall within the 1 to 7 range,
it will just say invalid day.
So if it's a value that it can't be
checked,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: It'll write
Invalid day, so it'll go down to this
default case, which is pretty useful.
It's important to note that switch
statements in this particular way only
operate on value types.
So you can have switch statements that
operate on reference types in different
ways, that is pattern matching, which
is a relatively new feature in C#, and
we'll cover that just a little bit later.
You can see, by the way, so,
it's recently that switch expressions
have been introduced to
the language in the last few years,
and that is a way that you can more
concisely write a switch statement.
I personally think that the syntax is a
little bit cleaner, but I don't really see
that it has this super big advantage,
other than it does save lines of code.
It doesn't have that break statement, but
this is functionally equivalent to
the switch statement that you have above.
You have the variable that
operates on the switch, and
then the same kind of logic executes
based on the value of the day.
So there's no real difference or
real surprise here,
this that you're seeing here
is functionally equivalent.
I do wanna talk about loops, of course,
one of the most important
control structures.
This is a classic for loop that you
see in lots of different languages.
It's made up of three statements
inside the parenthesis,
the declaration statement where you
declare variable, the statement where you
check to see if the loop should continue
to execute, this returns boolean.
And then a statement usually
made to increment the number or
change the condition of this to see
if the loop should keep executing.
So, as you might expect,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: If I copy and
paste this code in here,
this loop will execute 5 times,
it will basically say start at 0, and
while i < 5, write Console.WriteLine.
And after every time the loop runs
just increment that variable, so
you can see that it
writes out number 0 to 4.
Pretty standard,
like I said this is the classic loop,
it is not a loop that I write
a ton of very much anymore.
Most of the time, if I wanna iterate, I'm
usually iterating over a collection, and
in that case, I'm using foreach.
So, while loop is a basically a way
to continue to run a loop while
a condition is being met.
I write a surprising amount of these.
Oftentimes I will write them like this,
while (true), and
I'll do some kind of logic and
then eventually exit the loop.
One of the ways you can exit any loop
at any time is you can write a break
statement, and
that will exit the loop immediately.
So what I'll do is I'll just say basically
do this process as many times as you
need to until I get
a result that I expect.
As you can imagine, this is also a fairly
dangerous way to work on a loop, so
a lot of testing needs to go into any
time that you write a while (true) loop.
But you don't have to just have while
(true), you can also have some condition.
So if you have int i = 0 and
then you say while (i != 5),
Console.WriteLine(i), and we do i++.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: You will see
that it will print numbers 1 through 5.
And then as soon as this condition
is false, it will exit the loop and
it will stop.
Now, of course, we could do while (true)
and then really spin this thing out
of control without a break statement
that would inevitably crash the program.
[LAUGH] So, as I mentioned,
most of the time when I'm using
while loops it's in some kind of form or
fashion like this.
It's a little bit advanced, because
you do have to be careful with that.
The do-while loop is a condition
where everything that's going on
in the do will execute at least once.
I do not see these often, I do not ever
use them, not because they're not useful.
Occasionally, once maybe a year,
I will do a do-while.
But this is basically where you wanna say,
I want the do statement to execute at
least one time and then continue to
execute based on the value of a condition.
So, fairly useful to know about,
not super important to write about.
Foreach is a loop that is pretty much
the loop that I use for anything.
Anytime I'm using operating
on some type of collection,
I'm probably doing a foreach loop.
So let me declare real
quick an array of values.
And you saw me give an example
of this earlier, but
I basically can say value in arr, and
then it will go through each of
the elements of this array and
I can do some operation on them,
so Console.Writeline(value);.
I don't need to know anything
about this array, like its length,
I don't need to track some kind of i
in order to track what my place is,
the language and
the runtime do that for me.
So this is probably the most common loop
that in professional development you will
use, because you will iterate
over a collection of things and
do something with them.
Pretty cool, I mentioned break.
Break is a statement that you can use to
exit a loop at any time that goes for
for each as well.
So if I do foreach break;, boom, and I hit
play and run this, it's not gonna return
anything, because I just broke this loop
and just exited before it could even run.
The continue statement is used
to cut your way out of a loop,
in case, for some reason,
you need to exit the or
wanna continue the loop, but
you don't want some other logic to run.
So let's print Console.WriteLine(i); and
you'll see that the loop
does not stop executing.
It continues, just as the statement says,
but it does skip 5,
which is exactly what we expect,
it stops here.
You can think of it as kind of
like a return statement for
a loop in that it just shortcuts and then
it exits out of the loop very quickly.